## Chapter 6 Pretty Good Privacy
The politics of privacy, the future of cryptography and the quest for an uncrackable code

[...]

### THE FUTURE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY

In 1996, after three years of investigation, the U.S. attorney general’s office dropped its case against Zimmermann. The authorities realized that it was too late—PGP had escaped onto the Internet, and prosecuting Zimmermann would achieve nothing. There was the additional problem that Zimmermann was being supported by major institutions, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, which had published PGP in a six-hundred-page book. The book was being distributed around the world, so prosecuting Zimmermann would have meant prosecuting the MIT Press. The authorities were also reluctant to pursue a prosecution because there was a chance that Zimmermann would not be convicted. A trial might achieve nothing more than an embarrassing constitutional debate about the right to privacy, thereby stirring up yet more public sympathy in favor of widespread encryption.

At last, PGP was a legitimate product and Zimmermann was a free man. The investigation had turned him into a cryptographic crusader, and every marketing manager in the world must have envied the notoriety and free publicity that the case gave to PGP. At the end of 1997, Zimmermann sold PGP to Network Associates, and he became one of their senior partners. Although  PGP is now sold to businesses, it is still freely available to individuals who do not intend to use it for any commercial purpose. In other words, individuals who merely wish to exercise their right to privacy can still download PGP from the Internet without paying for it.

If you would like to obtain a copy of PGP, there are many sites on the Internet that offer it, and you should find them fairly easily. Probably the most reliable source is at www.pgpi.com/, the International PGP Home Page, from which you can download the American and international versions of PGP. At this point, I would like to absolve myself of any responsibility—if you do choose to install PGP, it is up to you to check that your computer is capable of running it, that the software is not infected with a virus, and so on. Also, you should check that you are in a country that permits the use of strong encryption.

The invention of public-key cryptography and the political debate that surrounds the use of strong cryptography bring us up to the present day, and it is clear that the cryptographers are winning the information war. According to Phil Zimmermann, we live in a golden age of cryptography: “It is now possible to make ciphers in modern cryptography that are really, really out of reach of all known forms of cryptanalysis. And I think it’s going to stay that way.” Zimmermann’s view is supported by William Crowell, deputy director of the NSA: “If all the personal computers in the world—approximately 260 million computers—were to be put to work on a single PGP-encrypted
message, it would take on average an estimated twelve million times the age of the universe to break a single message.”

Previous experience, however, tells us that every so-called unbreakable cipher has, sooner or later, succumbed to cryptanalysis. The Vigenère cipher was called le chiffre indéchiffrable, but Babbage broke it; Enigma was considered invulnerable until the Poles revealed its weaknesses. So, are cryptanalysts on the verge of another breakthrough, or is Zimmermann right? Predicting future developments in any technology is always a precarious task, but with ciphers it is particularly risky. Not only do we have to guess which discoveries lie in the future, but we also have to guess which discoveries lie in the present. The tale of James Ellis and GCHQ warns us that there may already
be remarkable breakthroughs hidden behind the veil of government secrecy.

But even if RSA is cracked, there is hope for secure encryption already. In 1984, Charles Bennett, a research fellow at IBM’s Thomas J. Watson Laboratories in New York, developed the idea of quantum cryptography, an encryption system that is absolutely unbreakable. Quantum cryptography is based on quantum physics, a theory that explains how the universe operates at the most fundamental level. Bennett’s idea is based on an aspect of quantum physics known as Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, which states that it is impossible to measure something with perfect accuracy because the act of measurement alters the object being measured.

For example, in order to measure the length of my hand, I must be able to see it, and therefore I must have a source of light, whether it is the sun or a lightbulb. The waves of light stream onto my hand and are then reflected toward my eye, but there are two problems. First, the wavelength of the light limits the accuracy of any length measurement. Additionally, the impact of light waves on my hand will actually change it, just like sea waves lapping against a cliff. As in the case of sea waves, the effect of the light waves is minuscule and is imperceptible at an everyday level. So an engineer trying to measure a bolt to a high degree of precision is limited by the quality of the measuring apparatus long before he runs into the limitations resulting from the uncertainty principle. At the microscopic level, however, the uncertainty principle is a serious problem. At the scale of protons and electrons, inaccuracies in measurement can become comparable to the size of objects being measured. The impact of light can significantly alter the tiny particles being observed.

Bennett came up with the idea of sending messages using fundamental particles, so tiny that if Eve tried to intercept or measure them, then she would mismeasure and alter them. In short, it becomes impossible for Eve to accurately intercept a communication, and even if she attempts to do this, her impact on the communication will become apparent to Alice and Bob, who will know that she is listening and will halt their correspondence.

You might wonder about the following problem: If Alice sends Bob a quantum cyrptographic communication, and Eve cannot read it because of the uncertainty principle, then how can Bob read it? Isn’t he also stymied by the uncertainty principle? The solution is that Bob needs to send a cryptic message back to Alice to confirm what he has received. Because Alice knows what she originally sent to Bob, this second message can be used to remove any ambiguity between Alice and Bob, while still leaving Eve in the dark. At the end of this double exchange, Alice and Bob are in a position to enjoy absolutely secure communication.

The whole idea of quantum cryptography sounds preposterous, but in 1988 Bennett successfully demonstrated secure communication between two computers across a distance of twelve inches. Long-distance messages are problematic, because the message is being conveyed by individual particles, which are more likely to be corrupted the farther they have to travel. So, ever since Bennett’s experiment, the challenge has been to build a quantum cryptographic system that operates
over useful distances. In 1995, researchers at the University of Geneva in Switzerland succeeded in implementing quantum cryptography from Geneva to the town of Nyon, a distance of a little over fourteen miles.

Security experts are now wondering how long it will be before quantum cryptography becomes a practical technology. At the moment there is no advantage in having quantum cryptography, because the RSA cipher already gives us access to effectively unbreakable encryption. However, if a codebreaker found a flaw in RSA, then quantum cryptography would become a necessity. So the race is on. The Swiss experiment has already demonstrated that it would be feasible to build a system that permits secure communication between financial institutions within a single city. Indeed, it is currently possible to build a quantum cryptography link between the White House and the Pentagon. Perhaps there already is one.

Quantum cryptography would mark the end of the battle between codemakers and codebreakers, the codemakers emerging victorious, because quantum cryptography is a truly unbreakable system of encryption. This may seem a rather exaggerated assertion, particularly in the light of previous similar claims. At different times over the last two thousand years cryptographers have believed that the monoalphabetic cipher, the polyalphabetic cipher and machine ciphers such as Enigma were all unbreakable. In each of these cases the cryptographers were eventually proved wrong because their claims were based merely on the fact that the complexity of the ciphers outstripped the ingenuity and technology of cryptanalysts at one point in history. With hindsight, we can see that the cryptanalysts would inevitably figure out a way of breaking each cipher, or developing technology that would break it for them.

However, the claim that quantum cryptography is secure is qualitatively different from all previous claims. Quantum cryptography is not just effectively unbreakable, it is absolutely unbreakable. Quantum theory, the most successful theory in the history of physics, means that it is impossible for Eve to intercept accurately any communication between Alice and Bob. Eve cannot even attempt to intercept anything without Alice and Bob being warned of her eavesdropping. Indeed, if a message protected by quantum cryptography were ever to be deciphered, it would mean that quantum theory is flawed, which would have devastating implications for physicists—they would be forced to reconsider their understanding of how the universe operates at the most fundamental level.

If quantum cryptography systems can be engineered to operate over long distances, the evolution of ciphers will stop. The quest for privacy will have come to an end. The technology will be available to guarantee secure communications for governments, the military, businesses and the public. The only question remaining would be whether or not governments would allow us to use the technology.